in a book or it took me about five years
and it had to do with the US government
recruitment of Nazis and Nazi
collaborators in the wake of World War
two and in the course of doing this book
it involved a large number of Freedom of
Information Act requests and quite a bit
of archival research and that type of
thing and the book ended up winning a
couple prizes sure buy this book now
available in paperback if it's not in
your store ask why it is and so what's
what's the title the title is a blowback
and that's a spy jargon for a covert
operation that begins successfully
overseas but it goes wrong and it blows
back in your face with the unexpected
and negative results well you know the
media how can I start this I'll tell you
one thing that would be good just as far
as this interview is concern is to have
you know comic more back and forth
through Q&A it would be easier for me to
deal with that but part of the
difficulty in dealing with these kind of
issues is the television the framework
or the format of television is not
particularly good for handling complex
stories and particularly when stories
deal with a lot of documentation or a
lot of documentary research if you think
about television you think about what
you see on television you'll find that
that it TV is really good at car chases
it's good at gun fights it's good at
conveying emotional storms but it's not
particularly good at
evidence or presenting intricate
arguments or one thing I mean it take
for example if you had a discussion
between Albert Einstein and and Moe
Howard of the Three Stooges as far as
nuclear physics okay well you got Albert
Einstein over here and you get moe
Howard over there
you give Moe a few lessons from from the
Madison Avenue advertising firm about
how to appear on television how to
articulate ideas and Bango moe Howard is
going to be as credible on television as
Albert Einstein is so the the this
creates problems in distant having
intelligence discussions of particularly
the underside of society or the the
hidden aspects of the way the government
works so one thing that I do in this
book is use the archival record the US
National Archives and stuff from
obtained through Freedom of Information
Act to try to get at the hidden history
of American intelligence agencies in the
wake of the war a wake of World War two
in the particular example that I'm
looking at are the use of Nazis
particularly Nazis as intelligence
agents and one reason for looking at
Nazis is that that it's an important
question on its face what became of
these people but another aspect of it is
that the moral issues are rather clearly
drawn you talk about over the
iran-contra affair or something like
this and you can always have a a Oliver
North type or or a John Point extra or
someone who comes on and says that that
the Nicaraguan Contras are a noble
freedom fighters and and so on but when
you're talking about Nazis the the moral
issues tend to be rather clearly drawn
and one thing that I found during the
research was that even people who were
the personal staff of Adolf Eichmann who
were the central administrative
apparatus of the mass extermination
programs even people like that were
considered suitable for recruitment as
intelligence agents why well the the the
rationale or the official explanation is
that they had some something special to
offer that the their contribution would
somehow protect the United States so
then what one has to do is to examine
that rationale is it true or is it false
what did these people actually do when
they were on the payroll and what you
find is not a heck of a lot
the documentary record for a number of
these senior Nazis is very clear today
you can go back and inspect it for
yourself what you find is for example we
protected Klaus Barbie who was a the the
Gestapo chief of Lyon France because
Lyon it's a big town you know it's like
Pittsburgh or something like that it's
it's a big industrial town this guy was
chief of secret police here's some man
who who made his mark during the war by
deporting orphaned children to death
camps that's what he did for a living
and the decision was made by Army
Intelligence to protect him after the
war because supposedly he could make
this contribution and what was the
contribution while you go out and you
look at his file today you find he would
collect leaflets that communists handed
out on street corners and in small towns
in Germany he had his boys go out and
there was a collection of gossip and
rumors and an information intelligence
quote-unquote about oh the French and
the Romanians and so communist yeah yeah
basically there was a Cold War mentality
that that in the phrase you know I
interviewed a ranking CIA officer who
was in charge of some of these programs
and his his phrase was any bastard as
long as he's anti-communist I mean how
important were these people in defending
American interests in defending American
interests I would say not particularly
important but they had unforeseen
consequences this is an example of the
United States shooting itself in the
foot through particularly covert
operations and and I think that that's
one reason why the business with the
Nazis after World War two
is relevant to the situation in the
1990s and I'll give you one example of
this in 1945 the chief of German
military intelligence on the Eastern
Front
that's the war the war in those days was
between the the Germans and the Soviet
Union in Eastern Europe was a man by the
name of Reinhard Galen and Galen had
taken part in a program that the Germans
ran during the war in which they herded
Soviet prisoners of war into prison
camps and then systematically starved
them to death they murdered somewhere
between three and four million people in
this way and the ones that who got out
of this
these starvation camps were ones that
would cooperate with general Galen and
give him some information so after the
war the Soviet Union wanted general
Galen very badly they wanted to put him
on trial for war crimes now
Galen surrendered to the Americans in
the spring of 1945 and eventually he
came to the attention of the of the man
who was in charge of army intelligence
on Europe and he was brought to the
United States given a do briefing and
set up in a special spy center really in
in West Germany where he ran his ran
operations after world war ii and
eventually became chief of the west
german intelligence service all right
now the point here is not what one
thinks of Galen the point here is that
when we hired Galen there was a price
tag connected to him in terms of our
relationship with the Soviets and it
seemed at the time that nobody in the
United States government understood that
this price tag was connected to Galen
the idea was as we could simply put him
on the payroll exploit his intelligence
this was very clever and and and that
would be the end of it but the Soviets
knew that Galen was on the pay
inna soviets knew that here was a guy
who had been involved in extraordinarily
brutal activities against the soviets
who was committed to overthrowing the
soviet government and so on so how did
the soviets read this recruitment and
protection of general Galen well their
interpretation was that at least this is
evident from their statements that by
recruiting general Galen we were
embarking upon a clandestine war against
the USSR and that the only way for them
to respond to this was to embark on a
clandestine war of their own now
you know I'm not defending Joseph Stalin
and I'm not saying what the Soviet Union
did during the Cold War was right what I
am saying is is that we have to be
grown-ups about how we deal with our
government policy abroad and we have to
understand that if we're going to pick
up a secret police chief from a given
country that the opponents of that
secret police chief are going to read
that gesture and interpret that in a
certain way yeah that's interesting okay
I mean the Soviets had lost 20 million
in World War two and they were slightly
resentful against their not so to say to
speak so they were paranoid to begin
with and in the United States it seems
gave them a good rationale to be
paranoid that's right do you think
there's any significance now that this
whole generation of Nazis are dying off
that the Cold War is starting to sort of
relax well I would argue that that the
motion towards a a date on if you will
or a relaxation of tensions between the
u.s. and the Soviets is is not driven by
the death of old Nazis it's driven by
particularly actions for other dramatic
actions on the Soviet side that that
demonstrate that they very much want a
relaxation of tensions and on the
American side they're slowly painfully
but nonetheless this motion that also on
the American side there seems to be a
desire to relax tensions and and I think
it's been very beneficial for everybody
concerned including the Europeans
I would argue that some of this
relaxation of tensions could have come
about not in in 1989 after spending over
three trillion dollars or whatever the
heck it is we spent over the last 40
years on on armaments but rather in the
1940s if the two sides in the mid-1940s
45:46 verse 7 had been willing to take
substantial steps in order to defuse
tension between the superpowers I think
that a lot of this conflict could have
been avoided now wait a minute now we
come back to the whole television the
whole business with television it's
because people are going to believe that
or not believe that agree with me
disagree with me on the basis of their
kind of gut response to that it's it's
really quite impossible to make a a
complicated argument but to really
examine evidence in the television
medium the reason for this is that
there's so little time that everything
is done with pictures and with the with
the spoken word and that's not a
particularly efficient way to to
transmit complicated ideas so what
happens is is that when television looks
or attempts to look at intelligence
activities it necessarily comes up with
a distorted image and this isn't because
the TV people are professionals they are
professionals in a usually highly
professional sea the limitation is in
the medium itself
so what happens is that because so many
of us are dependent upon
TV in to try to understand things like
the iran-contra affair or you know the
business of a channel Noriega and so on
it's very easy for the government to
sweep those types of activities under
the rug now we're sitting here in
Washington it's a midwinter 1989-1990
and two by and large the iran-contra
business has all kind of gone away its
dissipated you don't see it in the media
anymore but the fact of the matter is is
looking back on it this credible
evidence that number one George Bush
lied to the American people throughout
the campaign process about what he had
done during the iran-contra business
that will say Oliver North for example
who who comes across on television as a
man of bravery and integrity is the if
you look at the actual record of events
one finds a man who is not particularly
brave not particularly honest and not
particularly smart but but the the myth
of Oliver North in the myth of George
Bush's version of iran-contra seems to
be much more powerful than the actual
facts of what took place
scientists what do you have to say about
well I've been doing some research that
has to do with the roots of American
mass communication research and also the
inner relationship between mass
communication research and an American
psychological warfare after World War
two and what turns out is that a number
of sort of the founding fathers of mass
communication research we're on the
government's payroll for 20 years and
undertook projects that they could
market to the government and also to to
private clients and one of the one of
the effects of this had I think is that
it distorted the field of mass
communications research in other words
we know quite a bit about the effect or
non effects of television on its viewers
there's
you know whole encyclopedias of
statistical reports about this type of
television has that type of effect in
questionnaires and back and forth but
still in all we know relatively little
about the communications process and
particularly we we don't know very much
about communications for any purpose
other than manipulating people the whole
thrust of the field in those years was
what is the best way to manipulate an
audience what are the magic keys by
which we could use through television
through radio through distribution of
leaflets whatever it is that the
government could use to get them to do
what they wanted both as far as American
citizens are concerned and as far as
foreign audiences are concerned and one
must admit that persuading people to do
things is certainly part of what
communication is about but it's not the
whole thing
there's another aspect of communication
that is more basic and in a certain
sense more humane which has to do with
sharing and communion you know it's the
the route to a word you serve is the
same route so what does this mean okay
so getting back to the the theme about
intelligence that we've been discussing
here during the 1950's we know and we
can document today the government
undertook very large-scale propaganda
campaigns aimed at shaping American
public opinion as to what we were
supposed to think about foreign affairs
how we were supposed to look at the
German question how we were supposed to
look at what was going on in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union and so on
and the particular vehicle through which
this was done had to do with the
National Committee for a free Europe and
a number of its allied organizations now
the story here is this is that
immediately after World War two the u.s.
wanted to maintain diplomatic relations
with the countries like Hungary and
Poland and and the Romania and so on at
the same time because those countries
had been overrun by the Red Army during
the war there was a strong trend in the
US government towards overthrowing the
very same governments and in fact it was
part of our policy to try to instigate
revolutions in Eastern Europe and if
possible inside the Soviet Union itself
now some of the people that we were
using in order to to pursue this policy
were a extreme right-wing political
groups that had been on the payroll of
Berlin during World War two remember the
Nazis invaded these countries after
during the course of the war
particularly the Soviet Union I'm
referring to now and they would set up
puppet governments in in the areas under
German control well the same people who
had run those puppet governments and who
by the way had also run the mass
extermination programs during the Nazi
occupation they retreated back to West
Germany at the end of the war well so
the brainstorm in American psychological
warfare operations after World War two
is that we would put these same people
on the payroll as propagandists and
covert operators and different sorts of
agents and instigate revolutions inside
the communist countries in Eastern
Europe so so that was one half of the of
the psychological warfare campaign of
those days the other side of this was
that
these kind of programs were rather
expensive at the same time there was
also a very large military escalation
going on in the United States which was
extremely expensive we were paying more
on spending more on our military in 48
and 49 at a time when we were ostensibly
of peace 49 certainly then we had in
during the height of World War two so it
became necessary to try to convince the
American people that we had to do this
we had to pay these taxes that we had to
have these the military forces abroad
and so on and one way that that was done
was through the CIA the CIA created this
National Committee for a free Europe it
was a main to two people mainly were
responsible for putting this together so
George Kennan who was then at the State
Department and Allen Dulles who was then
in private practice as a lawyer but who
later would become director of the CIA
and they put together these Free Europe
committees that the the emigres group
said that I was discussing a moment ago
they would put these emigrate groups on
the payroll so that that was the channel
through which money was passed to these
organizations some of which had
collaborated with the Nazis so during
the war for uses psychological warfare
operators well to bring it back to the
United States most people who
or no 3d from their mid-thirties or
older will remember the the Radio Free
Europe promotions on television to let
freedom ring promotions and send in your
nickels and dimes to to support to radio
for Europe and the fact of the matter is
radio for Europe's bills are being paid
by the CIA and a sister project which is
known as rady it started out as radio
liberation from Bolshevism but is now
today known as Radio Liberty
the bills of those organizations were
actually being paid by the Central
Intelligence Agency the agency in what
at least in my opinion is a violation of
the law secretly underwrote the
activities of a of a group called
crusade for freedom that was the main
propaganda arm of these psychological
warfare operations in the United States
and the crusade for freedom what got
about five million dollars to start out
with to produce commercials they produce
radio commercials TV newspaper magazine
promotions and so on and the various
private media outlets were given tax
deductions in order to publish these
these advertisements and these
promotions well the point of these
promotions and it you can you
read this in the group's own literature
was to convince the American people to
support the US government's strategy in
Eastern Europe now whether or not one
agrees with that strategy it is evident
that the US government has no business
propagandizing in this fashion to the
American people they work for us not the
other way around and and and more than
that they they realize that at the time
that this was probably illegal so too
what Excel it's its initial budget was
five million dollars and you can go back
and you can look at what did five
million dollars buy in terms of media
time during the early 1950s well the the
amount of money that the CIA spent
trying to convince the American people
to follow the CIA strategy in Europe was
more money than the combined total of
all the money that was spent on the
dewey truman election campaign in 1948
the CIA was the largest political
advertiser in the United States during
the early 1950s and only the commercial
giants like General Motors and Procter
and Gamble and so on we're spending more
money tried to convince trying to sell
ideas to the American people so part of
the and and this program was simply a
component of a much more complex group
of programs designed to manipulate
people through the media the agency had
its own guys in the certain newspapers
it had the capability of planting
stories indifferent to media it had to
quite a number of scholars on its
payroll and so on and the
the director of these programs is a man
by the name of Frank Wisner he used to
refer to his Mighty Wurlitzer and you
know Wurlitzer is an old type of organ
that could make all different sorts of
sounds and he would talk about how
through manipulation of the press he
could to make you know make the the
newspaper scream or make them purr or
you know make them do what he wanted and
part of the effect of this is that the
government and particularly the agency
was able to set the parameters of what
were legitimate ideas and what were not
legitimate ideas particularly as far as
foreign affairs are concerned they were
able to say in effect that it was okay
to think maybe this far but no farther
than that and that ability we see that a
bill would eat still today when we're
looking at the situation in Latin
America when we're looking at the
situation in Eastern Europe is that
because of its money because of its
credibility because of its ability to to
advance a scholars career or work or to
block a person's career the government
intelligence agencies can shape what we
think and what we see on the media about
particularly about foreign affairs
questions
and I think that that's very dangerous
because we're a very powerful country we
have enormous influence and impact on
other people's lives and for the most
part we are quite ignorant about what
our impact on their lives is and when
you have the government with rather
substantial influence on telling us what
our impact on these people's lives is
you one gets us sort of
institutionalized ignorant about
American role in foreign affairs that
that I think is part of what explains
why we seem to - why why our strategy
overseas seems to keep blowing up in our
face where does this this is a blowback
phenomena come from is say in Panama for
example part of the explanation for this
is that that the the information that
were told about what's going on in
particularly in third world countries is
often shaped by people who have a rather
large interest in selling one policy or
another policy
that's enough for now let me ask you one
more question sure sure
in your study of the documents now study
of this policy
these policies whose who's in control
who's on it you know who's making these
decisions where are they coming from
it's not a democratic process and who's
who's really ruling America well it's a
very complicated question the main shape
of policy initiatives clearly comes from
the white house on down it it cannot be
said that for example the presidents of
in both Democratic presidents and
Republican presidents that the
presidents didn't know what was going on
the the main policy documents were
passed by the National Security Council
which is the the most senior national
security policy organization in the
country and they were either directly
signed by the President or or directly
reviewed by the president so that the
presidents had a good idea of the main
thrust of what was going on so in that
sense the the the president is culpable
but what one finds is that that we get
the emotion of social machinery that is
considerably a larger and less
predictable than then simply the idea of
some kind of plot in which the President
or Allen Dulles or somebody else was was
pulling strings the fact is is that when
you have a say that take the coup d'etat
in Guatemala that took place in the mid
1950s many different factions of power
had their fingers into that one
you had the President on the one hand
you had the CIA you had certain elements
of corporate America the United Fruit
Company in that particular case but
there's there's been other cases and
these groups interact with each other
their interests overlap and to a certain
degree one can even see that that forces
are spinning outside of these persons
control on the one hand they want to to
it to take the Guatemala example they
wanted to overthrow the Guatemalan
government because basically because the
Guatemalan government was raising
questions about the legitimacy of Banana
Republic rule by the United Fruit
Company so they wanted the the
government there out on the other hand
the the broader system by which our
country the United States influences
life abroad and has impact on people's
lives is not always understood or in
control of of corporate America for
example I mean you know I don't think
that the the president of AT&T and IBM
and so on sits down and kind of you know
rubs their hands and says well you know
how many children can we starve today in
Guatemala you know that it's not the way
it works but the the as a practical
matter the the system of international
relations which largely benefits the
eighties in the IBM's of the world leads
in lockstep to starvation of children in
Guatemala you know the Pope John Paul
recently had an encyclical on this I you
know I'm not a big fan of of Pope John
Paul but the the encyclical was a very
sensible document and it said quite
explicitly that we were in a
international situation today where some
of these social machines like
corporations like governments seem to
run practically by themselves to benefit
the people in the most developed
countries that means us at the expense
of the large majority of humanity
and there's a couple of problems of this
one is a morale problem at the poke
points too but but even if we you know
if you if wants to be cynical about all
this and say well too bad what's going
on in Brazil or South Korea or North
Korea for that matter there's a this is
strictly practical problem and that is
that we've created this situation where
so much of the world is so deeply in
debt to the particularly American
companies also European companies that
they spend all of their time just paying
the interest on these loans it's like
being overextended on your credit card
and part of the problem with this is you
said it creates a situation where the
people in Brazil or Mexico wherever are
locked into poverty and even if one
doesn't care about the suffering that
this creates the one thing that this
does create is that there's nobody to
buy the the American products if you
know if a person is an auto worker or if
a person is a farmer if a person is you
know it doesn't matter if you make
telephones somebody has got to buy this
stuff and if we create a international
system system in which the most people
are systematically impoverished then
there is the system breaks down under
its own weight